hi Stuart Russell is an AI researcher
who I've talked about a few times on
this channel already
he's been advocating for these kinds of
safety or alignment ideas to other AI
researchers for quite a few years now
and apparently the reaction he gets is
often something like this in stage one
we say nothing is going to happen stage
two we say something may be going to
happen but we should do nothing about it
well stage three we say that maybe we
should do something about it but there's
nothing we can do we say maybe there was
something we could have done but it's
too late now so he's put together a list
of some of the responses that people
give him that list is included in a
paper in some of his talks and in his
recent book human compatible which is
very good by the way check that one out
but as far as I know it's not yet a
standalone YouTube video even though
it's perfect YouTube video material it's
ten reasons why people who aren't you
are wrong about AI safety so that's what
this is ten reasons people give to not
pay attention to AI safety now before I
start I need to do a sort of double
disclaimer firstly as I said this is not
my list it's Stuart Russell's and he
gets the credit for it but secondly
professor Russell and I are not in any
way affiliated and I've adapted his list
and given my own take on it so this
video should not be considered a
representative of Stuart Russell's views
got that if there's anything in this
video if it's good credit goes to Stuart
Russell and if there's anything that's
bad blame goes to me okay without
further ado ten reasons people give do
not pay attention to AI safety reason
one will never actually make artificial
general intelligence this is apparently
a fairly common response even from AI
researchers which is very strange when
you consider the decades that the field
of AI has spent defending attacks from
the outside from people like Hubert
Dreyfus who I have a video about people
arguing that human-level AI is
impossible
AI researchers have always said no of
course it's possible and of course we're
going to do it and now people are
raising safety concerns some of them are
saying well of course we're never going
to do it the fact is that human level
intelligence general intelligence has
been a goal and a promise of the field
of artificial intelligence from the
beginning and it does seem quite weird
to say yes we are working towards this
as hard as we can but don't worry we'll
definitely fail imagine you find
yourself on a bus and the bus driver
says oh yeah I am driving too
Ward's the edge of that cliff but don't
worry the bus is bound to break down
before we get there no they're not
necessarily being disingenuous they may
actually believe that we'll never
achieve HEI but the thing is eminent
scientists saying that something is
impossible has never been a very
reliable indicator I mean they certainly
say that about a lot of things that
really are impossible but they also say
it about a lot of things that then go on
to happen sometimes quite quickly
for example respected scientists were
making public statements to the effect
that heavier-than-air human flight was
impossible right up until the Wright
brothers made their first flight at
Kitty Hawk and in fact I think even
slightly after that because the news
travelled fairly slowly in those days
similarly and this is something I talked
about on computer file the great
physicist Ernest Rutherford Nobel Prize
winner Lord Rutherford in fact at that
time gave a speech in 1933 in which he
implied that it was impossible to
harness energy from nuclear reactions he
said anyone who looked for a source of
power in the transformation of the atoms
was talking moonshine that speech was
published in The Times and Leo Szilard
read it went for a walk and while he was
on his walk he had the idea for using
neutrons to make a self-sustaining
nuclear chain reaction so in that case
the time taken from the world's most
eminent scientists claiming that a thing
was completely infeasible to someone
having the idea that makes it happen was
as far as we can tell somewhere around
16 hours so it's happened several times
that something which the best
researchers say can't be done has been
achieved soon after do I think AGI is
going to be discovered very soon no but
I can't completely rule it out either we
don't know what we don't know so it
seems pretty clear to me that unless we
destroy ourselves some other way first
we will sooner or later figure out how
to make human level artificial general
intelligence reason 2 well maybe we will
make AGI at some point but it's far too
soon to worry about it now suppose we
detected a huge asteroid on a collision
course with earth it's one of those mass
extinction event type asteroids and it's
going to hit us in say 40 years how soon
would be too soon to start worrying to
start working on solutions I would say
it's pretty sensible to start worrying
immediately not panicking of course
that's never useful but at least
spending some resources on the problem
gathering more information putting
together a plan and so on
Oh suppose SETI got an extraterrestrial
message
said hey what's up humanity we're a
highly advanced alien civilization and
we're on our way to earth we'll be there
in say 50 years again how long should we
just sit on that and do nothing at all
how long before it's sensible to start
thinking about how we might handle the
situation I would say the question
doesn't just depend on how long we have
but how long we need what are we going
to have to do and how long is that
likely to take us if we need to build
some kind of rocket to go and divert the
asteroid how long is that going to take
and how does that compare with how long
we have the thing is in the case of AGI
we really don't know how long it will
take to solve the alignment problem when
you look at it and consider it carefully
it appears to be quite a hard problem
it requires technical work that could
take a long time but it also requires
philosophical work it seems like it
might depend on finding good solutions
to some philosophical problems that
people have been wrestling with for a
very long time we don't have a great
history of solving difficult
philosophical problems very quickly so
it seems to me entirely plausible that
we'll need more time to solve this
problem than we actually have and of
course we don't know how long we have
either probably it'll be a long time but
predicting the future is extremely hard
and we can't rule out shorter timelines
it could be give it we're closer than we
think we are and deep learning will just
scale up to AGI without many major
innovations probably not but it could be
and it doesn't seem impossible that we
could have a rather foot insular type
situation it could be that there's one
weird trick to general intelligence and
once someone discovers that full AGI is
only a couple of years away in fact it's
not totally impossible that someone
already found it and has been working on
it for a while and secret none of these
seem very likely but confidently
declaring that it's definitely too soon
to even start working on this is
bizarrely overconfident the lower
estimates for how long we have seemed a
lot lower than the higher estimates for
how long we need the best time to start
working on this is not far in the future
it was probably quite a while ago now
reason 3 this is similar to reason to
worrying about AI safety is like
worrying about overpopulation on Mars I
don't think this is very tight analogy
for a few reasons one is that
overpopulation is one of those problems
that very definitely cannot sneak up on
you overpopulation can't take you by
surprise in the way that a new
technological development can but also
the safety concerns we're talking about
are not like overpopulation then
much more immediate and more basic it's
not like what if Mars becomes
overpopulated more like we don't have
any very good reason to expect to be
able to survive on Mars for even a day
and there are projects currently
underway trying to create AGI so it's as
though the Mars mission project is
already underway and one engineer says
to another you know we're putting all
this work into getting people to Mars
but almost none into what we're gonna do
if we actually manage it I mean how do
we even know that Mars is safe well I
think it's too soon to worry about that
don't you think we should wait until we
get there no no I don't think we should
I think it might be much more difficult
to work on these kinds of concerns once
we're already on the surface of Mars I
think we should do the safety research
ahead of time what kind of safety
research do you want to do well I was
thinking it might be good to have some
kind of suit that people could wear in
case the environment of Mars turns out
to be harmful in some way we don't know
that the surface of Mars is harmful
could be anything
well exactly we don't know so why not
take precautions what we do know doesn't
seem great I mean our what to do if we
make it to Mars research has never had
much funding so we can't be sure about
this but our preliminary work seems to
suggest that the atmosphere of Mars
might not actually be breathable so
we've been thinking about things like
suits and there's some early work on
something we're calling an airlock that
might turn out to be useful I don't see
how we could possibly hope to design
anything like that when we don't even
know what Mars is gonna be like how we
can have any chance of designing these
safety features properly with so little
information no we're just gonna go and
we'll figure it out when we get there
could I maybe stay on earth no
everybody's going together all at the
same time you know that all of humanity
it's gonna be great reason for well look
if you're worried about it being unsafe
because the goals are bad don't put in
bad goals it won't have human goals like
self-preservation if you don't put them
in there I have a whole video about the
concept of instrumental convergence
which I'd recommend checking out but as
a quick summary there are certain
behaviors that we would expect to be
exhibited by agents that have a wide
range of different goals because those
behaviors are a very good way of
achieving a very wide range of goals
self-preservation is a good example
agents will act as though they have
goals like self-preservation even if you
don't explicitly
come in there because it doesn't really
matter what your goal is you're probably
not going to be able to achieve that
goal if you're destroyed so we can
expect agents that are able to
understand that they can be destroyed to
take steps to prevent that pretty much
whatever goals they have you can't fetch
the coffee if you're dead reason five
well we can just not have explicit goals
at all
I think this confusion comes from the
fact that a lot of the time when we're
talking about safety we're talking about
the problems we might have if the
systems goals aren't well aligned with
ours or if the goals aren't specified
correctly and so on and this can make
people think that we're talking
specifically about designs that have
explicitly defined goals but that's not
actually the case the problems are much
more general than that and we'd expect
them to occur across a very wide range
of possible agent designs it's just that
the ones that have explicitly defined
reward functions or utility functions
are much easier to talk about the
systems with implicit goals still
probably have these problems but it's
just much harder to characterize the
problems and think about them and
therefore correspondingly much more
difficult to actually deal with those
problems so systems with implicit goals
are actually less safe just because it
becomes much harder to design them
safely not having explicit goals doesn't
solve the problem and probably makes it
worse I have some safety concerns about
this car this automobile that we're
inventing I'm worried about the steering
system no no yeah I just don't think
we're putting enough thought into
designing it to be really reliable and
easy to use right now it seems like even
tiny mistakes by the operator might
cause the car to swerve out of control
and crash into something it could be
very dangerous
you think the steering system is a cause
of safety concerns do you yeah well okay
yeah I will just build a car without one
a problem solved reason six
I don't think we should worry because
we're not going to end up with just
independent a eyes out in the world
doing things
there'll be teams with humans and AI
systems cooperating with each other we
just have to have humans involved in the
process working as a team with the AI
and they'll keep things safe so yes a
lot of the better approaches to AI
safety do involve humans and AI systems
working together but just have AI human
teams is sort of like saying nuclear
power plant safety isn't really a
concern we'll just have some humans
running it from a control
in such a way that they always have full
control over the rate of the reaction
like yes but that's not an actual
solution it's a description of a
property that you would want a solution
to have it would be nice to build a GI
systems that can work well in a team
with humans but we don't currently know
how to do that what it comes down to is
teamwork is fundamentally about pursuing
common goals
so misalignment precludes teamwork if
the AI systems goals aren't aligned with
yours
you can't collaborate with it it wants
something different from what you want
so human AI teams aren't a solution to
the alignment problem they actually
depend on it being already solved reason
7 but this is science we can't control
research we can't change what people
work on sure we can of course we can
we've done a loads of times
it ends up not being very noticeable
because we generally don't give that
much attention to things that don't
happen but for example we basically
don't do human genetic engineering or
human cloning we've been able to clone
sheep since 1996 and humans are not
really different from any other large
mammal from the perspective of this kind
of work we could have been doing all
kinds of mad science on human genetics
for decades now but we decided not to
there were conferences where agreements
were reached everyone agreed that they
weren't going to do certain types of
research and then we didn't do them so
agreements within the research community
are one way another way is international
treaties like did you know that the 1980
United Nations Convention on certain
conventional weapons has a section
titled protocol on blinding laser
weapons because of that protocol robots
that deliberately shine lasers in
people's eyes to blind them are against
international law I didn't know that
until after I'd already built one so
it's not a perfect metaphor but the
point is we don't see blinding laser
weapons deployed on the battlefield
today they're basically not a thing and
human genetic engineering is also not
really a thing because we decided that
we didn't want to do them and so we
didn't do them and by the way if we
decide that we don't want to make for
example lethal autonomous weapon systems
we don't have to make them either AI
researchers as a community can decide
the direction of our research and we
should reason eight now you're a bunch
of Luddites you're just against AI
because you don't understand it so in
response to this Stuart Russell has a
list of people who've raised basically
this concern which includes Alan Turing
IJ good
Norbert Wiener Marvin Minsky and Bill
Gates and there's another name I would
add to this list which I guessed you're
Russell is not allowed to add which is
Stuart Russell
it doesn't seem reasonable to suggest
that these people fear technology
because they don't understand it to say
the least these are some of the biggest
contributors to the technological
progress of the last century and
secondly these people aren't against AI
the argument for AI safety is not an
argument against AI any more than
nuclear physicists or engineers who work
on containment or waste disposal are
somehow against physics arguing for
speed limits and seat belts is not the
same as arguing to ban cars we're not
against AI because we don't understand
it we're for safety because we do
understand it reason 9 well if there's a
problem we'll just turn it off right
this one I've covered extensively
elsewhere our links in the description
but in summary I think super intelligent
agents might see that coming reason 10
ixnay on the x-ray you're trying to get
us all defunded isn't talking about
risks kind of bad for business
I'd say firstly I don't think that's
actually true we do need to make some
changes but that's not a bad thing for
AI research the solution to these safety
concerns is not less AI research but
more really just with a slightly
different focus and in fact I think this
is the same kind of mistake made by the
nuclear industry in the 50s they put
tremendous effort into reassuring
everyone they were safe they insisted
nothing could possibly go wrong
nuclear energy was going to be
completely safe and perfect clean and
too cheap Demeter basic reactor
principles and design make an atomic
explosion an impossibility arguably they
were so busy reassuring people about
safety that they actually didn't
emphasize safety enough internally
that's how you get a chin-up oh that's
how you get a Three Mile Island and
that's how you get a giant public
backlash that is tremendously bad for
the industry so I don't actually think
that talking about AI safety too much is
bad for business but it couldn't
possibly be worse than talking about
safety to little so there we are that's
ten reasons not to care about AI safety
some of these I've already covered in
more detail in other videos there will
be links in the description to those and
some of them might deserve a whole video
to themselves in future what do you
think are there any you'd like to hear
more about or have you come across any
that I missed
let me know in the comments I want to
end a video by thanking my wonderful
patrons it's all of these people here in
this video I'm especially thanking
Francisco Thomas key who has been a
patron for a year thank you so much for
your support I'm trying out a new thing
where as part of the process of making
videos I talk to the researchers who
wrote the papers I'm talking about I'll
record those for reference but they're
not really right for YouTube because
they're unstructured and unedited
conversation so I think I'm going to
start posting those to patreon if that
sounds like something you might want to
watch consider becoming a patron thanks
again to those who do and thank you all
for watching I'll see you next time
you